---
layout: page
title: "Analysis"
assignment: "boggle"

---


In your Analysis you will look at another class, **BoggleBoardFactory**. This class has a *getBoard* method- when called BoggleBaords are generated. The method generates a board by calling an **IBoardMaker** implementation *makeBoard* method. You'll likely use the **StandardBoardMaker** implementation supplied and created in the **BoggleBoardFactory** class.  This factory uses a random number generator without a specific seed so that when you start a sequence of Boggle games different boards are generated.

You can ensure that some reproducible sequence of boards is generated by using the *setRandom* method of the BoggleBoardFactory class with a java.util.Random object created with a specific seed, ie. 

		BoggleBoardFactory.setRandom(new Random(12345)); 

When debugging you may want to do this to ensure that you have a repeatable behavior. In your game-playing program you'll probably want users to have a different sequence of boards every time, but in debugging and statistic generation you want a reproducible sequence. For example, the supplied **BoggleStats** class sets the seed to ensure that comparisons across different implementations of lexicons and auto-players are valid. 

You need to report in your Analysis file information about which Lexicon implementation is the specified, as discussed earlier. 

You must write code to play lots of auto-games, not games in which humans play, but games in which all words are found on thousands of boards — see BoggleStats for a starting point. You must provide a board that scores the highest of all the 4×4 and 5×5 boards you test in running at least 10,000 auto‐games. and preferably 50,000 games. Report on how many seconds it takes your code to run for 1,000 games; for 10,000 games (or predict that if you can’t run that many); and predict/justify on how much time it would take your computer and implementation to simulate both 100,000 games and one million games. When doing the experiments be sure to set the random‐number generator’s seed, currently done already in BoggleStats and described above. If you can’t run 10,000 auto‐games, indicate the maximum number you can run.