---
layout: page
title: "FAQ"
assignment: "boggle"

---


**What is Boggle® and why are we writing it?**

 Duke CS used Boggle® for a Compsci 308 assignment at Duke in 1996. Boggle is in the [Nifty Assignments Archive] (http://nifty.stanford.edu/) and the current instantiation of the assignment is a combination of efforts from Compsci educators at Duke, Stanford, and UCSD. This version emphasizes empirical analyses of tradeoffs in different implementations.
The [Wikipedia Boggle] (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boggle) entry explains the game in detail including popular culture references to Boggle. Reviewing the rules on the Wikipedia site will help in understanding the play-of-the-game, but you'll be looking at implementation trade-offs that are independent of game-playing. You can play games based on words that are similar to Boggle online, e.g., Facebook's Scramble and Yahoo! Word Racer both of which are definitely related to Boggle.

Theoretical and practical approaches to word games have formed the basis for The [World's Fastest Scrabble Program] (http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=42420&coll=portal&dl=ACM) (Appel and Jacobson) for recognizing [Genomic Signatures in DeBruijn Chains] (http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-540-74126-8_21) (Heath and Pati) and for An [efficient interface between continuous speech recognition and language understanding] (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=319246&tag=1) (Oerder and Ney).

Analyzing alternative implementations and algorithms will help inform a better understanding of both work and play, what a great way to build a foundation in understanding how to turn data into information.


**Do diagonally adjacent cells count as neighbors?**
Yes.


**How do we get the highest scoring board?**
You can modify the code to print out the highest scoring board over 10,000 trials for size 4 and 5 boards.  Record the board that produces the highest score for each size.


**What exactly is the minLength parameter passed into findAllValidWords for BoardFirstAutoPlayer and do we need to take it into account?**
It's the minimum length required for something to be counted as a word. For example, if you set it equal to 3, then two-letter words like "is" and "or" won't count towards the score.
 
In particular, look at the BoggleStats class, where MIN_WORD is passed into the findAllValidWords method.







